From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Ketroa. This is the daily.
[Music]
>> All right, Blue. This morning, changes
are coming to some of your favorite
snacks.
>> This summer, some of the biggest food
companies in America have announced that
they're planning to stop using
artificial food dyes.
>> It's not just one company making this
big announcement. Craft Hind, one of the
nation's largest food companies.
>> General Mills is the maker of cereals,
including Cinnamon Toast Crunch, and
>> iconic products like Kool-Aid and Jell-O
poised for a new look.
>> Dozens of the top ice cream makers have
a great
>> It's also those jet popped marshmallows
as well as crisp.
>> It's a move that would transform the
look of some of the most iconic brands
that we buy.
>> Everyone is saying we just don't need
these artificial dyes anymore,
>> especially
[Applause]
Today, my colleague Julie Creswell on
how the health secretary Robert F.
Kennedy Jr. got big food to commit to a
change it resisted for years and that
could be bad for business.
[Music]
[Applause]
It's Monday, July 28th.
[Music]
Julie, welcome to the show. This is your
first time on the Daily, right?
>> It is. I'm so excited to be here.
>> We're excited to have you. So, you cover
the food industry, which with RFK Jr.
now overseeing the Food and Drug
Administration is facing a lot of
potential change. And we saw our first
major example of that recently when
these big food companies came out and
said they are going to eliminate
artificial dyes from their products. How
big of a deal are these announcements?
Just put this into context for me. This
is for the American food system one of
the biggest changes we've seen in
decades. Period. No other
administration, Republican, Democrat,
has gotten the food industry to agree in
mass to sort of make a significant
change like this ever. If this works,
this administration and Kennedy actually
do have the opportunity to really
reshape the American food system.
>> Right. I mean, he famously says he wants
to make America healthy again.
>> Exactly.
Where does his war on these artificial
dyes fit in with that? He sees
artificial dyes as part of the bigger
picture around chronic disease.
>> Mhm.
>> The whole issue with artificial dyes is
they sort of fall in that spectrum of
processed foods in America that he sees
as not good for Americans and
particularly American youth. But this
idea of making American healthy again
and especially by going after artificial
dyes is not new.
>> Vonnie and I are both food bloggers and
she does investigations and we were just
alarmed by what we uncovered. Basically,
um, these companies, these are American.
>> You've had a lot of these mom
influencers and people within the
movement that have been focusing on
artificial dyes going back at least a
decade. M
>> I'm here for all Americans who don't
know the truth about our food industry.
So I started a petition having petitions
signed by people and taking it to
Kelloggs and taking it to Mars and
trying to pressure them to remove
artificial dyes and what were the
arguments they were making about why
this should happen?
>> You know there was a number of arguments
that they were making.
>> So what is wrong with artificial food
dyes? Well, first of all, they're made
in a laboratory with chemicals derived
from petroleum.
>> One is these are dyes that are made from
petroleum.
>> The same type of ingredients like
gasoline, asphalt, and tar. They're not
from natural ingredients at all. A
second argument is, you know, these dyes
are used largely in foods that are
geared and marketed towards children.
And they produce bogus studies that say
these food dyes are healthy because
their marketing survey says that the
neon colors make kids want to buy it.
>> You know, adults aren't sitting down to
a big old bowl of Froot Loops. You know,
it's it's geared to
>> Speak for yourself children.
>> Well, we've all been there. But but
yeah, these are food that children want
to eat because they're bright, they're
colorful, they're fun, and you know,
marketing executives inside all these
companies know that. But one of the
strongest arguments lodged against these
artificial food dyes really has to do
with the the health implications of kids
consuming them in large amounts.
Artificial food dyes have been proven to
increase hyperactivity in children to
negatively affect
>> and those concerns have been echoed more
recently by RFK Jr.
>> It's very clear that dyes all of them
are linked in very very strong studies
to ADHD.
[Music]
>> And are those claims actually true,
Julie? Like what do we know about the
science there about the evidence?
There's not a huge body of evidence. Uh,
and there's been no research showing a
causal relationship between food dyes
and ADHD.
>> There was one study though that did
start to get a lot of attention and
helped kind of kick off this push
against artificial dyes. You know, that
occurs around 2007 in the UK when they
do something called the Southampton
study. Basically, they started giving
children drinks. Some had artificial
colors in them and then another group
that didn't. And they sort of watched
their behavior. And the children that
were given the drinks with red 40 or
other artificial colors in them started
showing more hyperactive behavior than
the others. And that's what ultimately
led the European Union to take sort of a
tougher stance or a harder look at these
artificial colors.
>> And so in the EU, when you say they
started to take a harder stance, what
does that mean? What did they do? So,
one of the things the European Union did
is in 2010, they started putting warning
labels on foods and beverages and snacks
that had these certain, they call them
the Southampton six. It's six specific
artificial dyes that they believe are
linked to behavioral issues. And now if
you buy a packet of candy that is made
or contains one of these Southampton 6
artificial dyes, they have a warning
label on it that says something to the
effect of this product could cause
behavioral issues with children. M
>> besides the warning labels on certain
foods, you know, there are certain
artificial colors like red three that
have either been banned or severely
restricted in other countries because of
their links to possible carcinogen and
cancer in male rats. In fact, the
evidence linking red dye 3 to cancer was
compelling enough that the EU banned it
back in the early 1990s. But in the US,
it took us much longer. The FDA just
this year passed a ban on red 3 and it
doesn't go into effect until 2027. So it
sounds like even though the body of
evidence itself isn't entirely
conclusive or as robust as it could be,
you're saying there's these other
countries that are taking a much more
aggressive stance on this. Why is that?
Why hasn't the US gone that route? the
EU takes an approach with regulation is
sort of like what's best for the
consumer. So if you're introducing a new
ingredient in Europe, let's say the
European Union, you know, you're going
to have to produce a bunch of um
scientific documents and papers and
research that basically says, you know,
that this ingredient is not going to
cause harm to the consumer, you know,
and then the European regulators are
going to weigh about that. They're going
to think about that before any new
ingredient gets introduced there. It's
something called the precautionary
principle. Here in the United States, we
tend to take sort of more of a what's
good for industry approach. Big food
here is a very powerful force. You know,
very powerful lobbying. They've got
their people that have been in and out
of the FDA. They put their people on
research groups and boards. And so I
think the the regulatory framework and
the ability for companies to introduce
new ingredients at least is is a little
is a little looser. There's a little bit
more self-regulation, a little bit more
trust me built into the system here in
the United States.
>> But American food companies have taken
steps in the past to remove artificial
colors from their foods. And basically
it was a bust. Why?
>> So, back in 2015, there was a movement
here in the United States. Again, a
little bit of writing off of the
European Union. You had a push to get
big food to change its ways to dump some
of these artificial colors.
>> I love bright fruity tricks.
>> Tricks.
>> It's a
>> And so, at the time, you had companies
like General Mills, which makes tricks
breakfast cereal.
>> General Mills announcing it will phase
out artificial colors. come out with
products that had no artificial colors.
>> General Mills could not find good
alternatives for blue and green pieces
in his trick cereal. So, the company is
getting rid of those colors. Other
colors such as red won't be as vibrant
>> and
[Music]
people didn't really want it.
>> General Mill says customers have been
asking for the old formula to come back.
>> Consumers were writing in saying that
the new colors made them depressed. So,
what do you think? You think it was the
kids or the adults complaining about the
grown-ups?
>> The grown-ups.
>> They didn't want to eat this cereal.
>> A cereal company is bringing its old
school cereal back. General Mills Trixs
cereal will once again be made with
artificial dyes and flavors. The classic
trick
>> in Mars, big candy company Mars, it does
some consumer analysis. And basically
its conclusion from looking at and
talking to consumers is that people in
the EU were much more willing and
actually wanted to have artificial
colors taken out of their candy there.
While people in the US were like, "Do
not touch my M&M's,
>> right? Don't mute my reds. Don't make me
>> don't take away my blue M&M's." You
know, without a doubt. And so they
reached a conclusion that after doing
this research that they weren't going to
touch M&M's and other, you know, bright
treats and candies that Americans wanted
to have remain the same.
It sounds like taking the dyes out of
food, according to the companies, would
probably reduce their sales. Companies
say, "We've tried this. It didn't work."
>> Generally speaking, yes. What's the
conclusion that the companies draw about
why Americans are, you know, less into
the natural muted look of food? There's
a whole ton of like sort of food science
around colors and how people interpret
them. You know, there there's a there's
a saying that, you know, we we eat with
our eyes.
>> Sure. When you see a bright colored chip
or a bright colored candy, your mind is
telling sort of your pallet, this is
going to taste strong. This is going to
taste spicy. This is going to taste
salty. You know, you have already in
your head what that's going to taste
like before you put it in your mouth.
And I think so American food companies
are trying to figure out where that
balance is because they've got decades
of background and research that say
bright color cell. M and sales are just
one part of the concern inside these
companies. The other part of the concern
is expenses. You know, the long and
short of it is moving away from
artificial colors which are really
inexpensive. That is going to drive the
costs up for the company, you know. And
then one of the biggest issues for food
companies right now is matching those
colors. You know what we've created in
in America using artificial colors is a
palette of colors that just don't exist
in nature. Blue, oh, really tough for
food manufacturers. You know, a
blueberry, which everybody's like, "Oh,
we've got blueberries." When you squish
a blueberry, it's red. It's not blue.
Wow.
>> Even greens, you're like, "Oh, we've got
kale. We've got spinach." Yes, there are
greens that occur in nature, but those
greens are very tricky to deal with.
They degrade very very quickly, very
easily.
>> One of the issues with natural colors is
they're very sensitive to heat and
light. Think of your your Gatorade in a
clear bottle. One of my kids loves the
blue Gatorade in a clear bottle. If you
switch to natural colors, you may have
to one, switch your packaging. You know,
you may not be able to have a clear
bottle because now you're going to
expose that natural color to light. The
greens or the blues may separate. So
when you pick that off the shelf, maybe
the top of it is clear, but the bottom
is where you've got your color sentiment
now. Uh oh.
>> And then on top of that, it also is
going to change your manufacturing
processes for these companies. You know,
artificial dyes can sit in tanks for
weeks, years, who knows? You know,
they're fine. But when you start to deal
with natural colors now, you may have to
refrigerate that. And in order to
achieve anything close to the colors
that we've sort of achieved with
artificial colors, you may have to use
10 times the amount of carrot juice or
beet juice to get the colors that you
want. You may have to reformulate your
Lucky Charms or your Froot Loops in
terms of just the actual ingredients. if
you start to add these different colors
to it. This is just much more complex
than I think I could have possibly
imagined before you just laid that out.
And I have to say I am personally
disturbed and saddened to learn that a
cool blue Gatorade doesn't occur
naturally um in our world. It it sounds
like companies also don't want to do it
because they say it also increases our
cost. So there's this like onetwo punch,
fewer sales, higher costs,
>> right? And all of this is coming at a
really tough time for big food. Almost
across the board, you've seen volumes of
their cookies and their chips decline. I
think after about 2 years of food
inflation, you know, there's a lot of
Americans that are just either buying
less of what they were buying before
from these big food brands or in some
cases they're increasingly trading down
to private label store brands. you know
what the less expensive versions of
those foods you know on top of that we
also are seeing the fallout I think it's
still early but everybody's watching the
rise of these weight loss drugs you know
your zmpex your GLP1s and there's lots
of research behind that that says when
Americans or people go onto those drugs
they definitely eat less of these
processed foods and so food companies
are are looking at these big changes
around their ingredients at a time when
they're just also seeing sales and
volumes of their foods falling off.
Okay, so these are the forces that RFK
Jr. is contending with when he comes
into office. This powerful food industry
with little incentive to change, a
regulatory environment that gives
companies quite a bit of power. So, how
is it that Kennedy, less than a year in
office, has been able to actually
effectively fight these forces
to go after big food? You know, he sort
of knew he couldn't use the the usual
playbook, right? Regulation, right?
Creating a rule, having everybody weigh
in on it, including food companies and
and lobbyists. It would have gone down
in sort of a big battle of my science
versus your science. likely would have
ended up in court. He'd be gone. No
change would happen. So, in order to
really get change to occur here, he
decided to take a very novel approach.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Julie, before the break, you said that
RFK Jr. had come up with this novel
approach to get food companies to
finally eliminate artificial food dyes
from their products. Tell me about that
strategy. So, what he did was take much
more of sort of a a peer pressure
approach to regulation on artificial
dyes.
In April, he puts out an announcement
basically saying that we're going to be
banning certain dyes, popular dyes that
are widely used in the American food
system. and he holds this press
conference.
>> Let's join me in welcoming a warrior for
America's children, RFK Jr.,
>> you know, when Kennedy comes up on
stage.
>> I was talking with my staff about these
petroleum based dies. And I said, if
they want to eat petroleum, they ought
to add it themselves at home, but they
shouldn't be feeding it to the rest of
us. and
>> and he and other healthc care leaders on
stage lay out the plan to get artificial
dyes out of our food system.
>> And I want to commend the food companies
for working with us to achieve this
agreement or this settlement.
>> You know, they say they've got all these
companies on board, but what's missing,
you know, who's not there are any food
companies.
And is that weird? It's really weird.
You know, this is a big announcement and
it's normally something that you would
have, you know, a few company executives
up there smiling for the cameras and
shaking hands and showing that they're
on board with this scene.
>> Today, we're going to take some
questions from the press.
>> You know, you actually see a reporter
and there's reporters that notice that
there's no food companies that are there
and they ask Kennedy.
>> You mentioned the goal is to work with
the food industry to get most of the
major synthetic food dyes out.
>> You know, like are the food companies
really okay with this? What sort of
agreements do you have?
>> What is the plan if the food industry
does not voluntarily agree to do that?
And what are the next steps if you can't
get agreement within the industry? Thank
you.
>> Well, here the industry has voluntarily
agreed and
>> and basically he says, "Yeah, we have
this understanding. It's happening.
>> We are going to work with the industry.
They've shown a lot of leadership on
this."
>> He says they are on board.
>> Yes. And are they? Not really. No,
what's happening behind the scenes, I
spoke with a person close to the
administration shortly after the
announcement and basically what they had
was a soft agreement from one company.
Wow. A soft agreement from one company
is not everyone is lined up behind this.
So, did RFK Jr. just bluff?
>> He did. He bluffed and what he hoped was
or was sort of banking on was that this
one company in the industry, they would
not say who it was, but that they
expected an announcement to be made
within a couple of weeks of the press
conference and that that would be the
beginning of sort of the whole industry
toppling over.
>> And it seems like his bet on that domino
effect happening actually paid off. How
did that exactly go down? It starts with
PepsiCo, which makes Doritos and Cheetos
and all these popular snacks. And and
the executives mentioned that they're
going to start to move a number of their
chips. Lays chips are going to have no
artificial colors in them by the end of
this year. And then you get to like June
and Craft Hind comes out and they say we
are going to be rid of artificial dyes
in our foods and beverages and whatever
by the end of 2027. Even more recently,
you know, the cascade and the domino
effect is happening. More companies, you
know, Nestle, General Mill, Smuckers, WK
Kellogg, which is Froot Loops, which is
these cereals that says it too will be
out of artificial colors in its foods
and cereals and products by the end of
2027.
I'm just struck by the avalanche, the
cascade you described of announcements
of these food companies saying, "We are
willing to change."
Why? Why are they doing this if the
thing they're responding to is really
just soft power on the part of RFK Jr.?
It's soft power, but it's power. And I
think this administration, more so than
past administrations, causes a lot of
fear, right? you've seen where if they
don't like something you're doing, they
can come down and they can make your
life really, really hard.
>> And I think there's an element of the
food industry saying, "Okay, artificial
dyes, we don't like it. It's going to
cost us money and maybe we will, maybe
we won't change. We'll see how that
plays out." But if it makes them happy,
we say we're going to change it and
hopefully they leave us alone because
there's other like sort of like big game
here or bigger issues, right? If this
administration comes out and says less
sugar, less fat, less salt, that will
really throw this industry into, you
know, a downward spiral.
>> That's even harder than dyes to remove
from this stuff.
>> Much more difficult and would absolutely
impact sales, you know. So, so there's a
little bit of an element here of I think
like pacify this administration, give
them a win, and hope that you can fly
below the radar for the next few years
in a big way. To your point though, I I
have to imagine that one pitfall of this
strategy is that there are no new
regulations here. Obviously, RFK Jr. is
just relying on his own persuasive
power. Or perhaps the company's not
wanting to get on the wrong side of the
Trump administration.
But that means this push doesn't
actually have any real teeth. That's
right. Indefinitely skeptics or critics
will note this industry said and looked
into making these changes a decade ago
and many of them didn't. Right? You
know, so there's definitely a group of
people that worry that we could get to
the end of 2027 and most of our major
food and beverages and snacks still
contain artificial colors. But that's
where for the industry though, there's
another aspect of this,
which is the emerging state laws that
could actually be a bigger problem for
them.
>> What are those state laws? Tell me about
that. So you've had a number of states
including California, Texas, West
Virginia that are actually creating laws
around artificial colors that are much
more stringent that are actual, you
know, in some cases bans. In other
cases, Texas wants warning labels.
They're creating a set of rules for the
food industry that's going to cause it
significant problems because you know
the industry is very much worried about
a patchwork quilt of rules as they like
to say. If you are Eminem Mars now if
you're making your candy and you're
selling it in Texas you're going to have
to have a warning label but not in New
Mexico. You know it's really difficult
and confusing for them. that those are
actual rules that could create more
change than this administration can with
this voluntary movement.
The fact that it's Texas and like West
Virginia that's doing this, adding
regulations on this stuff is surprising.
I mean, those are red states and not
places that I would necessarily expect
to be leading the pack on food
regulation, right? I mean, obviously you
have California, you know, a much more
liberal left-leaning state which has
been ahead of all of this, but it also
shows, I think, the power, the political
power of the Maha movement that you have
Texas, that you have West Virginia, you
know, sort of these deep red states that
are basically saying we're going to
regulate artificial dyes in a way that
the federal government is not doing.
I want to step back here for a minute
and just ask what you think RFK is
really up to here.
I think it's clear he's trying to bypass
the bureaucracy,
force companies with the soft power to
make these pretty radical changes to the
way our food looks.
But even if he does succeed,
if you make Froot Loops less colorful,
less neon,
maybe you on the margins do some good if
if the research is right, but are you
fundamentally changing the big health
issues that he and other people care
about?
So if you talk to nutritionists, you
know, or health experts, you know,
there's sort of one of their biggest
criticism of going after food dyes,
there's a little bit of a so whatism
here, right? There's really no studies
that say food dyes equals obesity, food
dyes equals um diabetes, right? So
they're sort of like great, fine, you
get that out of the system, but it's not
really attacking your core mission
statement, which is that that chronic
disease.
But then there's another sort of line of
thinking around all of this is whether
in making these foods and snacks and
drinks less pretty, less bright. Are you
in a roundabout way tackling the bigger
issue which is the chronic disease,
which is the obesity, which is the
diabetes. And especially when we're when
we're talking about children, if
children who were drawn to brightly
colored cereals and consuming boxes of
them, you know, now eat less or eat
smaller portion sizes of them. Are you
now tackling the bigger issue around
sugar, salt, saturated fat, portion
control? You know, we're we're really
talking about retraining America,
retraining the American mindset, the
connection between our eyes and our
pallet. And you know, if we say, "I
don't want this. I I I'm going to eat
less of this, that could be a win. That
could absolutely be a win in terms of
our overall intake of ultrarocessed
foods."
Julie, thank you. We really appreciate
your time. Thanks for having me.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Sunday afternoon, President Trump
announced that the US and the European
Union had reached a trade deal, setting
a 15% tariff on most goods, including
cars.
The agreement is in line with a deal
that Trump recently reached with Japan,
and it brought an end to months of tense
negotiations with some of America's
closest allies and trading partners. But
the new rate was a big increase from
tariffs that had previously been in
place and was much higher than Europe
had been pushing for.
And Israel said that it paused military
activity in parts of Gaza on Sunday to
allow international aid in as outrage
grows over the severe hunger facing
Palestinians in the enclave.
Israeli forces suspended operations in
at least three areas of Gaza and plan to
designate secure routes for the United
Nations to deliver aid. According to the
Israeli military,
the UN says more than one in three
people in Gaza has not been eating for
multiple days in a row. And according to
Gaza's health ministry, more than 50
Palestinians have died this month from
starvation.
Today's episode was produced by Ricky
Nevetski, Shannon Lynn, Rob Zipco, and
Caitlyn O'Keefe. It was edited by Liz O
Balin, Patricia Willins, and Lisa Chow.
Fact checked by Susan Lee. Contains
original music by Marian Lozano, Dan
Pal, and Diane Wong, and was engineered
by Chris Wood. Our theme music is by Jim
Brunberg and Ben Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Ketro. See you tomorrow.
[Music]